https://www.sunstar.com.ph/article/1763670

POLICE LAUNCH OPLAN DABAW KALINAW

PHOTO: https://www.sunstar.com.ph/uploads/images/2018/09/10/84962.jpg

THE Police Regional Office in Davao Region (PRO 11) launched Monday, September 10, Oplan Dabaw Kalinaw, an inter-agency operations for enforcement of laws and ordinances, to achieve a peaceful and safer region.

The pilot area of the program's region-wide implementation is Tagum City. The program was launched at Energy Park, Apokon, Tagum City.

The Oplan Dabaw Kalinaw is patterned after Davao City Police Office's Oplan Kalinaw which is implemented regularly targeting identified areas to weed out criminal elements and empower the communities.

The program is a comprehensive effort to counter terrorism and anti-criminality operations including identification, background check and profiling of transient residents and manhunt operations of wanted persons or fugitives hiding in urban communities.

It also includes community service for residents wherein security forces conduct community outreach program such as free medical checkup and giving of medicines with vitamins and community empowerment through crime prevention education.

PRO 11 regional director Police Chief Superintendent Marcelo Morales earlier expressed his intention to expand the Oplan Kalinaw throughout the Davao region when he assumed the post in August after citing its good result in the reduction of crime rate in the city. It also led to the apprehensions of criminals lurking in the city.

Aside from the Philippine National Police (PNP), other members of the inter-agency are the Land Transportation Office (LTO), Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency (PDEA), Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB), Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), and other law enforcement agency geared to deliver various government services.

Meanwhile, Police Chief Inspector Milgrace Driz, PRO 11 spokesperson, said the send-off ceremony for their personnel also took place during the event, spearheaded by Morales, together with Tagum City Mayor Allan Rellon.